---
layout: default
title: BLOG
heading: Some Initial Thoughts On Haskell
permalink: /drafts/haskell/
---
{% include _blog-post-headings.md %}

*Disclaimer: this is not a monad tutorial. Thank goodness.*

I just finished up my largest side project in recent memory, [an implementation of the Raft consensus algorithm](//github.com/lmartel/ToyBoat-Raft) in Haskell. Along the way I learned plenty about distributed systems in general and Raft in particular. I might write up some of that eventually, but for now I want to talk about the hardest part of the project: accomplishing things in Haskell.

Learning curve aside, my overall impression was strongly positive. Haskell has a lot of features not found in more mainstream languages like Java or Ruby. In my (still-limited) experience, many of these features are strict improvements, some are imperfect but still helpful, and a couple seem actively harmful. In roughly descending order of severity:

#### Actually Functional

Like most people who program for the Web, I spend lots of time writing JavaScript while wishing I was writing anything else. Many of us cope by writing our JavaScript in "functional style," using popular libraries like Underscore and cutting-edge EMCAScript features like Fat Arrow Functions to replace some of the muck in our codebases with `map`, `filter`, and `reduce`. Using these simple building blocks to combine small functions is a great way to build programs.

However, these techniques will always be second-class citizens in an imperative language. Haskell (like other functional languages) is *built around* manipulating functions. Operations like `map` are not just present but fundamental and highly generalized. Other key features for writing thoroughly functional code like function composition, currying (partial function application), and pattern matching are part of the core language. This ensures that code written in "functional style" is not only flexible and performant, but *idiomatic.* You can write something that looks vaguely like a `Foldable` or `Functor` instance in JavaScript, but good luck getting it past code review.

#### Powerfully Typed



#### Purity Is Great

Haskell is pure by default. This means that a plain-old-function like `length`, which returns an `Int`, can't sneak around behind your back writing to variables or posting on Twitter. Functions that include side effects like modifying program state or writing to files must own up to their behavior in their type signatures (`IO Int` instead of `Int`, for example).

It turns out that all those folks on Hacker News were right, this is wonderful. Stateless functions are stupidly easy to test because of *referential transparency*: pure functions always evaluate the same way for the same inputs. Does `length [] = 0` and `length [7,12] = 2`? Cool, it almost definitely works. That may or may not be impressive to you, depending on how many Node.js developers you've met who shrug and say "our tests are nondeterministic, so I just run them three times." It boils down to: if you don't enforce testability at compile time, you probably won't get testability at runtime.

In addition, purity-by-default forces the programmer to think about good program architecture. Mutable variables and state are perfectly achievable in Haskell but they're not *free* the way they are in, say, Ruby. With Haskell I found myself less tempted to add flags and fields without thinking. Refactoring is much more productive and less painful when you do it often and in small increments, and that's exactly what purity-by-default encourages.


##### Well, Purity WOULD Be Great

exceptions ugh

##### Purity Should Be A Spectrum


#### Laziness Takes Way Too Much Effort

#### TL;DR

Haskell isn't perfect, but the benefits of its powerful functional primitives and expressive type system easily outweighed
